I wanted to start off this short essay by saying first and foremost that Subnautica isn’t a hard game by any means. And whether or not it should be is part of the reason I’m typing this, because many people will have differing opinions on what is or isn’t hard and what should or shouldn’t be difficult.

Now what exactly need to be changed here? We need to look at the elements of similar games to determine why Subnautica’s difficulty can often fall flat, and why it needs to be adjusted for a more complete experience.

Subnautica is in a niche group of games I would call “survival exploration”. This list includes titles like Ark Survival Evolved, and The Long Dark to name a couple. They include survival and crafting elements, but exploration is often in the front seat of these games, by exploring the gorgeously crafted worlds the devs have generously allowed us to play through.

Now those two games are difficult in their own respects, with TLD probably being the hardest and Subnautica being the easiest. And looking at what makes the other titles difficult can help us improve Subnauticas difficulty in general.

The Long Dark has you constantly fighting elements of the world around you. Wild animals, hunger, thirst, and the bitter freezing cold are the most common. With the player constantly scraping by on resources, and most importantly with only one life. Now, in Subnautica, players can choose a “hardcore” mode which adds one life as a stipulation along with no O2 alerts. However, this doesn’t make the game any harder, as surviving with the bare minimum is what makes The Long Dark challenging.

Subnautica has a plethora of resources at your disposal at almost any given time. Food, water, and shelter aren’t things you to worry about because they aren’t core mechanics. This is where I think Subnautica can pull from this particular title when it comes to difficulty. Mainly in resource allocation, and possibly temperature. Unless the player is quite literally standing on lava, temperature is never something that is worried about. A good tweak that could be made to add to the difficulty is needing specific gear to reach deeper depths because of the grueling cold. This would also add extra realism, and is something that could be exclusively added in hardcore mode if the general playerbase takes issue to it.

Now taking a look at Ark Survival Evolved can give us a good look at pathfinding and enemy AI done correctly, as opposed to the choppy and primitive feeling of Subnauticas AI.

Enemy dinos in Ark Survival seek the player out in aggressive format when they come within a specific range. This makes exploring in Ark a very methodical and planned experience, as dinos are relentless and can kill the player with ease.

In Subnautica, enemy leviathans or common predators are clunky, easy to out smart, and aren’t challenging enough to justify the large amount of defense the player is given against them. Simply shutting off your Cyclops render all threats meaningless to you, as anything that can damage it will get bored and simply swim off. Players are well equipped with time freezing rifles and batteries are extremely easy to craft making even the biggest leviathans no longer a threat to the player. Smaller predators like stalkers and sand sharks rarely seem to hit me as a I play, despite clearly being agro’d on to me and following me with an intent to do damage that isn’t done.

Players in Ark aren’t well equipped to deal with the biggest and most dangerous predators until hours upon hours of grinding and getting the right materials and blueprints can be achieved. In Subnautica, a stasis rifle can be crafted almost as soon as the player starts to explore one particular region and gets access to one particular “rare” resource. The same AI problems with the common predators can be said of the leviathan class ones, which again, are relatively easy to out maneuver once you get a general feel for them.

These problems are ones that may or may never be addressed, but I think for the most part are ones the community can agree needs to be fixed. As these small issues being tweaked can add a surplus of replay value and an extra methodical and strategic layer when playing that players never knew they needed to begin with. Thank you all for reading, and I’ll gladly take any constructive criticism and feeding.
